# Region-specific mean field models enhance simulations of local and global brain dynamics

**Source**: semantic-scholar
**ID**: e1fa0a868dbe2dcc3682f25616ce8f1fb2c7e455
**DOI**: 10.1038/s41540-025-00543-9
**URL**: https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e1fa0a868dbe2dcc3682f25616ce8f1fb2c7e455
**Date**: 2025-01-24
**Year**: 2025
**Authors**: R. Lorenzi, Fulvia Palesi, C. Casellato, C. G. Gandini Wheeler-Kingshott, Egidio D’Angelo
**Venue**: bioRxiv
**Citations**: 5

## Abstract

Brain dynamics can be simulated using virtual brain models, in which a standard mathematical representation of oscillatory activity is usually adopted for all cortical and subcortical regions. However, some brain regions have specific microcircuit properties that are not recapitulated by standard oscillators. Moreover, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-based connectomes may not be able to capture local circuit connectivity. Region-specific models incorporating computational properties of local neurons and microcircuits have recently been generated using the mean field (MF) approach and proposed to impact large-scale brain dynamics. Here we have used a MF of the cerebellar cortex to generate a mesoscopic model of the whole cerebellum featuring a prewired connectivity of multiple cerebellar cortical areas with deep cerebellar nuclei. This multi-node cerebellar mean field model was then used to substitute the corresponding standard oscillators and build up a cerebellar mean field virtual brain (cMF-TVB), for a group of healthy human subjects. Simulations revealed that electrophysiological and fMRI signals generated by the cMF-TVB significantly improved the fitness of local and global dynamics with respect to a homogeneous model made solely of standard oscillators. The cMF-TVB reproduced the rhythmic oscillations and coherence typical of the cerebellar circuit and allowed to correlate electrophysiological and functional MRI signals to specific neuronal populations. In aggregate, region-specific models based on MF technology and pre-wired circuit connectivity can significantly improve virtual brain simulations fostering the generation of effective brain digital twins that could be used for physiological studies and clinical applications.
