# Evaluation of dynamic causal modelling and Bayesian model selection using simulations of networks of spiking neurons

**arXiv ID**: 2306.15859
**Published**: 2023-06-28
**Updated**: 2023-06-28
**Authors**: Matthew G. Thomas
**Categories**: q-bio.NC
**URL**: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.15859
**PDF**: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2306.15859
**Source**: arXiv

## Abstract

Inferring the mechanisms underlying physiological and pathological processes in the brain from recorded electrical activity is challenging. Bayesian model selection and dynamic causal modelling aim to identify likely biophysical models to explain data and to fit the model parameters. Here, we use data generated by simulations to investigate the effectiveness of Bayesian model selection and dynamic causal modelling when applied at steady state in the frequency domain to identify and fit Jansen-Rit models. We first investigate the impact of the necessary assumption of linearity on the dynamics of the Jansen-Rit model. We then apply dynamic causal modelling and Bayesian model selection to data generated from simulations of linear neural mass models, non-linear neural mass models, and networks of discrete spiking neurons. Action potentials are a characteristic feature of neuronal dynamics but have not previously been explicitly included in simulations used to test Bayesian model selection or dynamic causal modelling. We find that the assumption of linearity abolishes the qualitative transitions seen as a function of the connectivity parameter in the original Jansen-Rit model. As with previous work, we find that the recovery procedures are effective when applied to data from linear Jansen-Rit neural mass models, however, when applying them to non-linear neural mass models and networks of discrete spiking neurons we find that their effectiveness is significantly reduced, suggesting caution is required when applying these methods.
